# ADR-001: Exempt delegations as a transitionary mechanism for safe adoption of liquid staking.

## Context 

Liquid proof of stake may exacerbates the principal agent risk that exists at the heart of the delegated proof of stake system. The core of the problem is that validators do not actually own the stake that is delegated to them. This leaves the open to perverse incentives to attack the consensus system.

Cosmos introduced the idea of min self bond in the staking. This creates a minimum amount of stake the must be bonded by the validators operator key. 

This feature has very little effect on the behavior of delegates.

## Proposal:

The liquid staking system will introduce a new system. Delegator can issue a transaction that exempts their delegation to a specific validator from liquid staking. Once this transaction is issued, the SharesToToken tx will fail for the delegation. 

Furthermore there will be a governance controlled parameter  that will restrict the total number of tokenized shares issued for each validator by the sum of the exempt delegations multiplied by a scalar value.

For example, if governance has set value to 10.  Once a delegation exempts 1000 stake from the liquid staking system, then then other delegators may chose to issue up 10,000 tokenized shares with the tokens to shares transactions.

If the maximum amount of tokenized shares are issued, the exempt delegation cannot be undelegated unless the validator chooses to leave the active validator set.
 

## Economics:

We expect that eventually governance may decide that the principal agent problems between validators and liquid staking are resolved through the existence of mature liquid staking synthetic asset systems and their associate risk framework. Governance can effectively disable the feature by setting the scalar value to -1 and allow unlimited minting and all exempt delegations to be freely undelegated.

During the transitionary period, this creates a market for exempt from liquid staking delegations that may serve to help further decentralize the validator set.

It also allows multiple participants in a validator business to hold their personal stakes in segregated accounts but all collectively contribute towards demonstrating alignment with the safety of the protocol.
