# ADR-002: Liquid Staking Module

## Abstract

The LSM is designed to safely and efficiently facilitate the adoption of ATOM liquid staking.

The LSM mitigates liquid staking risks by limiting the total amount of ATOM that can be liquid staked to 30% of all staked ATOM. 

As an additional risk-mitigation feature, the LSM introduces a requirement that validators self-bond ATOM to be eligible for delegations from liquid staking providers.

## Context 

Liquid proof of stake systems  exacerbate the risk that a single entity - the liquid staking provider - amasses more than ⅓ the total staked supply on a given chain, giving it the power to halt that chain’s block production or censor transactions and proposals.

Liquid proof of stake may also exacerbates the principal agent risk that exists at the heart of the delegated proof of stake system. The core of the problem is that validators do not actually own the stake that is delegated to them. This leaves the open to perverse incentives to attack the consensus system. Cosmos introduced the idea of min self bond in the staking. This creates a minimum amount of stake the must be bonded by the validators operator key. This feature has very little effect on the behavior of delegates.


## Proposal:


### Limiting liquid staking


The LSM would limit the percentage of liquid staked ATOM by all liquid staking providers to 30% of the total supply of staked ATOM. There is currently 222.76M ATOM staked, so if the LSM were installed today then the total liquid staked ATOM supply would be limited to a maximum of 66.83M ATOM.

This is a key safety feature, as it would prevent liquid staking providers from collectively controlling more than ⅓ of the total staked ATOM supply, which is the threshold at which a group of bad actors could halt block production.

Technically speaking, this cap on liquid staked ATOM is enforced by limiting the total number of tokens that can be staked via interchain accounts on the Cosmos Hub. Once this cap is reached, the LSM prevents interchain accounts from staking any more ATOM.



### Validator self-bond

As an additional security feature, validators who want to receive delegations from liquid staking providers would be required to self-bond a certain amount of ATOM. The validator self-bond, or “validator-bond,” means that validators need to have “skin in the game” in order to be entrusted with delegations from liquid staking providers. This disincentivizes malicious behavior and enables the validator to negotiate its relationship with liquid staking providers.

Technically speaking, the validator-bond is tracked by the LSM. The maximum number of tokens that can be delegated to a validator by a liquid staking provider is equal to the validator-bond multiplied by the “validator-bond factor.” The initial validator bond factor would be set at 250, but can be configured by governance. 

With a validator-bond factor of 250, for every one ATOM a validator self-bonds, that validator is eligible to receive up to two-hundred-and-fifty ATOM delegated from liquid staking providers. The validator-bond has no impact on anything other than eligibility for delegations from liquid staking providers.

Without self-bonding ATOM, a validator can’t receive delegations from liquid staking providers. And if a validator’s maximum amount of delegated ATOM from liquid staking providers has been met, it would have to self-bond more ATOM to become eligible for additional liquid staking provider delegations.

### Instantly liquid staking staked ATOM

Next, let’s discuss how the LSM makes the adoption of ATOM liquid staking more efficient, and can help the Cosmos Hub build strong relationships with liquid staking providers. The LSM enables users to instantly liquid stake their staked ATOM, without having to wait the twenty-one day unbonding period. This is important, because a very large portion of the ATOM supply is currently staked. Liquid staking ATOM that is already staked incurs a switching cost in the form of three weeks’ forfeited staking rewards. The LSM eliminates this switching cost.


A user would be able to visit any liquid staking provider that has integrated with the LSM and click a button to convert his staked ATOM to liquid staked ATOM. It would be as easy as liquid staking unstaked ATOM.

Technically speaking, this is accomplished by using something called an “LSM share.” Using the liquid staking module, a user can tokenize their staked ATOM and turn it into LSM shares. LSM shares can be redeemed for underlying staked tokens and are transferable. After staked ATOM is tokenized it can be immediately transferred to a liquid staking provider in exchange for liquid staking tokens - without having to wait for the unbonding period.
 

## Economics:

We expect that eventually governance may decide that the principal agent problems between validators and liquid staking are resolved through the existence of mature liquid staking synthetic asset systems and their associate risk framework. Governance can effectively disable the feature by setting the scalar value to -1 and allow unlimited minting and all liquid delegations to be freely undelegated.

During the transitionary period, this creates a market for liquid shares that may serve to help further decentralize the validator set.

It also allows multiple participants in a validator business to hold their personal stakes in segregated accounts but all collectively contribute towards demonstrating alignment with the safety of the protocol.

## Technical Spec

### Modification from ADR-001 
Track both module account and LSM tokenized shares against the validator bond and global liquid staking cap. This requires changing the standard Delegation messages to introspect. The reason for tracking module account shares against validator bond is because ICAs are module accounts under the hood, so in practice this limits liquid staking with validator bonds. Also rename exempt delegation to validator bond, exempt delegation factor to validator bond factor.

### Software parameters:

A new governance parameter is introduced that defines the ratio of validator self-bonded tokens to issued liquid shares. This is called the validator self-bond factor.


### Types
```
Params
  * Add parameter GlobalLiquidStakingCap (type: sdk.Dec)
    Represents a percentage 0 to 1

Delegation
  * Rename Exempt attribute to ValidatorBond

Validator
  * Rename TotalExemptShares to TotalValidatorBondShares
  * Rename TotalTokenizedShares to TotalLiquidShares

```

### Keeper
- Store the total amount of liquid staked tokens in the store as an Dec
```
SetTotalLiquidStakedTokens(tokens sdk.Dec)
GetTotalLiquidStakedTokens() -> sdk.Dec
```
### Helper Functions
Determining LST Provider Accounts
* Option 1: Check the length of the address (module account is 32 bytes). Should work with ICA module accounts. Issues: will not work with CW since some legacy contracts have a different length. Should not be a problem with Cosmos Hub, as there are no CW accounts.
* Option 2: Attempt to cast it as a module account. Issues: It’s possible other accounts have the same interface.
* Approach: Check Option 1 AND Option 2
```
// >>> Determining a module account - OPTION 1
 isModuleAccount = len(address) == 32


// >>> Determining a module account - OPTION 2
_, isModuleAccount = account.(*authtypes.ModuleAccount)


// >>> Determining if a module account is used by LSM - OPTION 1
moduleAccount, isModuleAccount = account.(authtypes.ModuleAccount)
isTokenizedShareCustodian = strings.HasPrefix(moduleAccount.GetName(), "tokenizeshare_")


// >>> Determining if a module account is used by LSM - OPTION 2
// keys.go
TokenizeShareModuleAccountPrefix = []byte{0x65}
…
func GetTokenizeShareRecordModuleAccountPrefix(moduleAddress sdk.AccAddress) []byte {
	return append(TokenizeShareModuleAccountPrefix, address.MustLengthPrefix(moduleAddress)...)
}

// tokenize_share_record.go
ADD setTokenizeShareRecordModuleAccount(record)
MODIFY AddTokenizeShareRecord (to call setTokenizeShareRecordModuleAccount)
MODIFY DeleteTokenizeShareRecord (to delete GetTokenize…ModuleAccountPrefix)
ADD GetTokenizeShareRecordByModuleAccount(account sdk.AccAddress) -> (record types.TokenizeShareRecord, found bool) 

// AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider
 _, isTokenizedSharesCustodian = GetTokenizeShareRecordFromModuleAccount(address)
```
#### Checking Global Cap
* The global cap is represented as a percentage
* For the denominator, use the balance of the bonded pool
```
func ExceedsGlobalLiquidStakingCap(tokens: sdk.Dec) -> bool:
  liquidStakingCap = k.GlobalLiquidStakingCap()
  liquidStakedAmount = k.GetTotalLiquidStaked()

  bondedPoolAddress = k.ak.GetModuleAddress(types.BondedPoolName)
  totalStakedAmount = k.bk.GetBalance(bondedPoolAddress, k.BondDenom()).Amount

  updatedTotalStaked = totalStakedAmount.Add(tokens)
  updatedLiquidStaked = liquidStakedAmount.Add(tokens)
  liquidStakePercent = updatedLiquidStaked.Quo(updatedTotalStaked)

  return liquidStakedPercent.GT(globalCapPercent)

// Since the total liquid stake is denominated in tokens, we need to decrement
// when there's a slash
func Slash() **modify**:
  ...
  validatorLiquidPortion = validator.TotalLiquidShares.Quo(validator.DelegatorShares)
  slashedLiquidTokens := validatorLiquidPortion.Mul(slashAmount).TruncateInt()
  k.DecreaseTotalLiquidStaked(slashedLiquidTokens)
```
#### Checking Validator Bond
```
// This code is already in LSM
func ExceedsValidatorBondCap(validator, stakeAmount: sdk.Dec) -> bool:
   validatorBondFactor = k.ExemptionFactor()
   if validatorBondFactor.IsNegative() {
     return false
   } 

   maxValTotalShare := validator.TotalValidatorBondShares.Mul(validatorBondFactor)
   return validator.TotalLiquidShares.Add(shares).GT(maxValTotalShare)
```

#### Transaction
Failure Cases
```
func Delegate() **modify** in msg_server
   …
   if AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider:
     if ExceedsGlobalLiquidStakingCap: 
        error
     if ExceedsValidatorBondCap:
        error
     
func BeginRedelegate() **modify** in msg_server
      …
   if AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider:
     if ExceedsValidatorBondCap:
        error

func Undelegate() **no changes needed - already implemented** 
func TokenizeShares() **no changes needed - already implemented** 

```

#### Accounting

* Delegations/Undelegations should only count towards a liquid staking cap if they were initiated by an Liquid Staking Token Provider (LSTP)
* Tokenizing shares should only count towards the cap if they were not issued by an LSTP (because their shares would have already been counted when they delegated)
* When redeeming shares to a LSTP, there should be no impact towards the cap because all tokenized shares are already included (per the two bullet points above)
* When redeeming shares to a non-LSTP account, the shares are no longer liquid and are not owned by a provider so they should be decremented from the cap

```
func Delegate() **modify** in msg_server
   …
   if AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider(sender):
      k.IncreaseTotalLiquidStaked(tokens)
      validator.TotalLiquidShares += shares

func Unbond() **modify** in msg_server
   …
   if AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider(sender):
     k.DecreaseTotalLiquidStaked(tokens) 
     validator.TotalLiquidShares -= shares

func BeginRedelegate() **modify**
   …
   if AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider(sender):
      srcValidator.TotalLiquidShares -= shares
      dstValidator.TotalLiquidShares += shares

func TokenizeShares() **modify** 
   …
   if !AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider(sender):
      k.IncreaseTotalLiquidStaked(tokens)
      validator.TotalLiquidShares += shares

   
func RedeemTokens() **modify**
   …
   if !AccountIsLiquidStakingProvider(sender):
      k.DecreaseTotalLiquidStaked(tokens)
      validator.TotalLiquidShares -= shares
```

#### Tombstoning
* When a validator is tombstoned, the tombstoned stake can be excluded from the global cap. This requires a small change to the evidence module
```
func HandleEquivocationEvidence() **modify** in evidence keeper
   …
   k.slashingKeeper.Tombstone(ctx, consAddr)

   // We would need to add GetTotalLiquidShares to the validator interface
   // in staking/exported.go
   k.stakingKeeper.DecreaseTotalLiquidStaked(validator.GetTotalLiquidShares())


```
